---
permalink: /research-statement/
title: "Research statement"
sidebar:
  nav: sidebar
author_profile: false
share: true
---

Since the beginning of my Ph.D. program in 2013, I have developed a
research interest in cutting-edge computational methods for collecting
and analysing large complex datasets such as social media data. My PhD
project, completed in 2017 and published as a monograph entitled
"[Online communities and crowds in the rise of the Five Star
Movement](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-45508-8)" by Palgrave
([Bailo, 2020](GV24EKSW)),
applied innovative methods to collect cross-platform social media data
and analyse them through the lenses of both social network analysis and
quantitative text analysis (NLP).

Since completing my PhD and working as a postdoctoral fellow and
lecturer, I have further developed my quantitative research skills by
collaborating with several transdisciplinary research teams. These
collaborations resulted in the following top-tier venues:

-   An article published with a digital ethnographer and computer
    scientist published on [*Information, Communication and
    Society*](https://doi.org/10.1177/20563051211024963)
    (Bailo et al., 2023) researching
    through network analysis of how far-right Twitter accounts were able
    to exploit information disorder to boost their reach on social
    media.

-   An article I co-authored with two digital ethnographers and two
    computer scientists published in the [*Proceedings of the
    International AAAI Conference on Web and Social
    Media*](https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/ICWSM/article/view/19312)
    (Kong et al., 2022) researching the online diffusion of opinions during
    both a climate change-related crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic
    through innovative machine learning algorithms applied to text
    classification;

-   An article published in [*Social Media +
    Society*](https://doi.org/10.1177/20563051211024963)
    (Bailo et al., 2021) that analysed over two million posts to assess the
    impact of changes in the Facebook algorithm on the attention
    attracted by the posts of news organisations;

-   An article published in the *[Journal of Peace
    Research](https://doi.org/10.1177/00223433211018501)*
    (Bailo & Goldsmith, 2021)
    applying the synthetic control method to test the nuclear
    stability--instability paradox with a large multivariate dataset of
    country dyads.

I have previously published collaborative research applying network
analysis methods to social media data in [*Information, Communication &
Society*](https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118x.2016.1252410)
([@bailo_hybrid_2017]) and [*Policy
Studies*](https://doi.org/10.1080/01442872.2015.1095282)
(Bailo, 2015), research using spatial analysis of demographic
and electoral data in [*European Political
Science*](https://doi.org/10.1057/s41304-016-0097-0)
([@abbondanza_electoral_2018]), and research based on the statistical
modelling of questionnaire data in [*Political
Studies*](https://doi.org/10.1177/0032321715614012)
(Vromen et al., 2016).

My current and future research is grounded in two lines of research
about the

1.  **Emergence, interaction, and diffusion of political opinions
    online**; and the

2.  **Impacts of social media technologies and services on political
    participation and organisation**.

This research agenda recognises the existence of two distinct layers of
activities (see Figure below). The top layer is defined by Cloud
platforms and their information and networking technologies, such as
artificial intelligence systems, search engines or social networking
sites. The bottom layer is defined by patterns and relations emerging
from our society and connecting people and groups. These two layers
communicate through an evolving range of *interfaces* and *devices*. The
**Cloud layer** is progressively becoming the dominant place for the
diffusion of socially and politically relevant information. Its
technologies have been observed to promote and foster information
disorders at an unprecedented scale. The **Society layer** is the domain
where people connect and interact as political actors and is also where
they struggle to influence critical epistemic outcomes, that is,
decisions about knowledge affecting the broader society.

![image](/assets/images/research-statement/research-presentation-2022.svg)

## 1. Emergence, interaction, and diffusion of political opinions online

In the **first research line** on the **Cloud layer**, I plan to
continue using a strong transdisciplinary approach to research the
*emergence*, *interaction*, and *diffusion of political opinions online*
around contentious issues and on *developing practical measures for the
degree of information disorder* that can be found online around
different topics.

[Our research team]((https://youtu.be/LlyjMmRXb5s), which I was
instrumental in creating in 2019, has successfully attracted external
and internal grants, including from Facebook (now Meta) for USD 60,000
and from the Australian Department of Defence for AUD 500,000, which we
initiated in 2023 and are currently administering. The team engages in
state-of-the-art transdisciplinary research with experts in digital
ethnography, computer science and political science and aims at
developing both methodological innovations to enhance the capacity to
collect and analyse complex human-generated data as well as empirical
discoveries while, at the same time, addressing questions concerning the
impact of the current information and communication infrastructure on
politics and society.

Three research questions guide the development of this line of research.

1.  What opinions do **emerge** online, but also when and where?

2.  How do opinions **interact** with others through the Cloud and its
    online communities?

3.  What factors **determine** the speed and reach of the diffusion of
    opinions?

Answers to these questions will contribute to improving the functioning
of social media platforms - a critical place for public opinion
formation. In addition to providing a practical understanding to develop
applications and content moderation policies that foster discussion
quality over content engagement, it will improve our understanding of
regulating social media platforms to protect vulnerable groups,
institutions and democratic processes (e.g. elections).

Researching cloud platforms involves a number of methodological
challenges:

### Collecting representative data about social media interactions

Although large volumes of social media data are available, many
    restrictions due to business decisions and ethical safeguards
    challenge collecting representative data, especially capturing
    unfolding events.

### Adopting and designing collaborative tools

The interdisciplinary collaboration around research data that is
    both very large and complex (e.g. temporal, multidimensional,
    multimedia) requires using effective interfaces for both humans and
    machines to interact qualitatively and quantitatively with the data.
    Multimodal access is critical for data *triangulation*, combining
    qualitative and quantitative (or computational) methods to the data.

We address these challenges through methodological innovations,
including the design of the following:

1.  Long-term online experiments;

2.  Computational techniques and software for cross-platform data
    collection and data matching;

3.  Machine learning pipelines for multidimensional (i.e., topic and
    polarity) text classification integrating both qualitative research,
    crowd-sourced input and large language model input;

4.  Research software applications to collaboratively define and
    manipulate data ontologies for opinion mapping and assist with
    automatically classifying large-scale collections of texts.

In addition to attracting significant funds, this research line has
already resulted in the publication of two peer-reviewed publications
(Bailo et al., 2023; Kong et al., 2022).

Our current research work is concentrated on the following:

-   The design of a **dashboard** for the real-time monitoring and
    analysis of social media data (see Figure on the right).

-   The development of a definition for **information disorder** as a
    global measure of any information space and an approach to quantify
    and measure it.

-   The empirical detection of **information operations** on social
    media and the development of modelling techniques to understand,
    measure and forecast their effectiveness.

-   The write-up of a handbook for using **Wikibase**, an extension of
    the software running Wikipedia to work with semi-structured data, in
    transdisciplinary research projects involving large data streams.

![image](/assets/images/research-statement/dashboard-diagram.svg)

## 2. Impacts of social media on political participation and organisation

In the **second research line**, which is methodologically and
conceptually linked to the first, I will continue studying the impact of
social media technologies and services on *political participation* and
*organisation*. This research will build on my study of Italy's Five
Star Movement and the role played by the Internet in affording and
shaping its emergence, from a blog in mid-2005 to national government in
2018.

Using big data and comparative analysis, I am interested in further
investigating the effect of Internet-mediated participation on political
stability. Because Internet technologies and services can contextually
reduce the importance of traditional communicative and organisational
infrastructures (and their gatekeepers), their diffusion can
theoretically result in the systematic emergence of new competitive
political actors such as parties, movements, or leaders. Because social
media platforms and their recommender systems can contextually downgrade
the quality of the public debate, they can also stir political
discontent and facilitate its mobilisation.

Three research questions guide the development of this second line of
research:

1.  Can \"**Internet capital**\" offset a lack of **social capital** in
    facilitating participation and organisation?

    -   Does Internet capital facilitate the organisation of **political
        discontent** from the margin (low-social capital areas)?

2.  Do Internet technologies and services create more **political
    instability** by facilitating the emergence of new political actors
    (individuals or organisations)?

3.  Do social media negatively affect the **quality of political
    deliberation?** What factors, technologies or services are important
    in reducing the quality of online conversation?

This research line has already resulted in the publication of a
monograph with Palgrave ([@bailo_online_2020]) and is currently
concentrated on the following:

-   The development of theoretical work on the concept of \"**political
    epistemology**\", explaining the diffusion of politically
    contentious knowledge on social media. This is expected to inform
    the design of social media applications that are resilient to
    information disorders and the politically motivated diffusion of
    misinformation.

-   The write-up of two articles on the Internet-based **mobilisation
    networks** of the Five Star Movement. Based on the analysis of
    geocoded event data and survey data, these articles explain the role
    of both traditional social capital networks and Internet-based
    networks in the activation of militants and voters.

-   A survey-based research on the **reconfiguration of political
    engagement** after the fall of the Islamic Republic of
    **Afghanistan** in August 2021. This project offers new insights
    into whether the sudden fall of democracy can reconfigure civic
    networks for political engagement and the role played by social
    media in the reconfiguration.
