I have been teaching at the undergraduate and postgraduate levels since
2014; since 2018, my responsibilities have included **curriculum
design**, **course development**, **coordination** and the **supervision
of multiple teaching teams**.

Between 2019 and 2023, I have been coordinating three courses in the
**Bachelor of Communication (Digital and Social Media)** offered by the
School of Communication of the University of Technology Sydney,
including *Working with Data and Code* and *Digital Media Metrics*. In
2022, I designed the postgraduate short course *Application
Implementation with Microsoft Dynamics*.

In 2023, I moved to the **School of Social and Political Sciences** at
the University of Sydney, where I have been designing, coordinating and
delivering three courses: *Data Analytics in the Social Sciences* at the
undergraduate level and *Research Design* and *Data Analytics for Social
Research* at the post-graduate level.

My teaching experience in **quantitative methods** includes
**statistical and data analysis** (with R), **research methods**, **data
visualisation** (with R and Tableau), and **coding** (with R and Python)
delivered to diverse audiences, including undergraduate, postgraduate
and research students but also academics and professionals. I have
designed and delivered quantitative research methods courses and
workshops to postgraduate students and academic staff, including social
media analysis, [network
analysis](https://digital-methods-sydney.github.io/ws-201806/) with R,
and [quantitative text
analysis](https://digital-methods-sydney.github.io/ws-201812/) with R.
In 2018, I designed a course on [Topic models in
R](https://digital-methods-sydney.github.io/ws-201812/) and delivered it
during the *Digital Humanities Downunder* summer school to an audience
of about 50 research students, postdoctoral researchers and academic
staff. In 2022, I designed and delivered a one-day [Text mining and
analysis](https://fraba.github.io/2022-ANZCA-workshop-The-art-of-text-analysis/)
workshop during the *ANZCA Digital Methods Winter School*.

I have experience **coordinating large courses** (up to 300 students)
and recruiting, training and supervising teaching assistants. My
coordinating responsibilities have included managing teaching staff,
marking, recruiting students, providing pastoral care for students,
defending academic integrity against plagiarism and cheating, and
supervising graduate and postgraduate research students (I am currently
supervising one PhD student and one Honour student). In 2020 and 2021, I
gained significant experience transitioning courses and materials to an
online-only delivery mode using Canvas. I have used Canvas and other
educational technologies (e.g. Padlet, Menti and the Student
Relationship Engagement System) ever since.

My teaching experience, combined with my research experience, gives me
the ability to teach quantitative methods, including computational
methods and advanced research methods to a wide range of cohorts in
various fields of study and with a range of numerical and computer
skills. For example, my experience teaching statistical elements and
computer programming to students in the Bachelor of Communication
program at UTS and at the School of Social and Political at the
University of Sydney helped me develop the capacity to simplify complex
numerical concepts with the support of curated visualisations.

I have a genuine passion for developing digital partnerships in learning
and teaching, particularly for introducing **technology-enhanced
pedagogy** and innovative digital tools. In the design of my curricula,
I also embrace the **Active Learning** principle so as to recurrently
engage students with hands-on in-class activities to apply the
information they just received.

My accomplishments in this area over the past two years include the
following:

1.  I developed a teaching program for Python using [**Jupyter
    Notebook**](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-07196-1), one
    of the most popular computational tools among data scientists. This
    allows students to access a Python interpreter easily from their
    browser to execute interactive notebooks without the need to install
    dedicated software on their computer, an error-prone process that
    can potentially discourage students.

2.  To support the **coupling of both statistical concepts and R** in
    the learning experience, I designed a series of short, hands-on
    exercises for practising statistical concepts that students
    encounter in data analytics units and applying them to real-world
    problems. These exercises are created with the open-source R package
    "[exams]((https://www.r-exams.org/))", which allows for **seamless
    portability** across and incorporation with different Learning
    management systems (LMS), and are **dynamically generated from a
    template**, allowing for random variations of the numerical values
    and questions.

3.  I designed and implemented a **full-fledged social media
    application** to create a realistic social media "sandpit" where
    students can not only complete tasks requiring a reactive digital
    audience but also gain access to complete social media datasets.

4.  I designed a series of **assessment tasks based on simulated data**,
    allowing students to engage with realistic and large-scale
    demographics surveys, opinion surveys and social media records.
    These types of personal information is often unavailable for
    teaching purposes because of ethical considerations or cost. Based
    on actual census and survey records, I coded generative functions to
    create thousands (and potentially millions) of individuals with
    realistic interests, opinions, and demographic traits.

5.  I am actively maintaining a
    [website](https://fraba.github.io/r-academic-twitter/) with learning
    resources to help researchers access the Twitter API using R.
