---
title: "Presentation @ ASNAC 2023: Measuring information disorder"
permalink: "/U2B7XNQ2/"
excerpt: "In this paper, I introduce a robust framework for quantifying 'information disorder' within diverse information spaces, detailing its measurement methodology and demonstrating its applicability through two case studies."
presentation-title: "Online and offline social capital as catalyst for political mobilisation: The case of digital native political parties"
contributors: "Francesco Bailo"
presenters: "Francesco Bailo"
last_modified_at: 2023-10-13
date: "2023-11-27"
place: Sydney, Australia
meeting-name: "Australian Social Network Analysis Conference (ASNAC) 2023"
meeting-webpage-url: "https://www.ansna.org.au/asnac-savethedate"
presentation-webpage-url: ""
presentation-url: ""
type: "Paper"
categories:
  - Blog
  - Conference
  - "Research-presentation"
tags:
  - Information disorder
  - Network analysis
---

* [Conference website](https://www.ansna.org.au/asnac-savethedate)
* Presentation webpage
* Presentation slides 

In this paper, I introduce a robust framework for quantifying
'information disorder' within diverse information spaces, detailing
its measurement methodology and demonstrating its applicability
through two case studies. I define 'information disorder' as the
**probability of encountering consistent information for effective
decision-making**. An 'information space' is conceptualised as a
multilayer graph, where each node signifies semantic content, such as
a sentence in a Wikipedia article or a social media post. Nodes within
this graph are connected through four types of edges that signify 1)
agreement, 2) disagreement, 3) redundancy (i.e. equivalence), and 4)
shared reference (i.e. pointing to the same domain/content). 

I calculate the disorder metric based on a weighted sample of content,
where weights are determined by the (approximated) probability that a
recommender system will serve the content. This sampling approach not
only reduces computational effort but also enables assessment when
full data access is unavailable (which, of course, is generally the
case). The density of each layer of the multilayer graph resulting
from the sampling is used to compute a measure of information disorder
using this simple formula: (agreement - disagreement) + redundant +
SameSource. By definition, a negative score will indicate information
disorder, as conflicting information outweighs concordant and
redundant information and the presence of common sources. The same
sample is also used to measure the degree of singularism and
pluralism, providing additional insights about information diffusion
within an information space. The degree of singularism/pluralism is
computed by dividing the number of communities of a graph resulting
from flattening the agreement, redundant and SameSource layers by the
number of nodes. A value approaching zero will indicate extreme
pluralism, and conversely, a value approaching 1 extreme
singularism. 

We apply this methodology to assess information disorder
at multiple time points in different information spaces: the entire
English Wikipedia at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and selected
Reddit threaded conversations. The relations between semantic content nodes needed to define layers 1), 2) and 3) are coded using the text-embedding-ada-002 through OpenAI's API using this prompt: "Considering their meaning, are the following two sentences in agreement, disagreement, or equivalent?". Instead, the relations of layer 4) are defined by comparing the domain of the embedded URLs (when present). A measure of the disorder of an information system like a social media platform that is scalable because automatically generated leveraging the growing capabilities of LLMs is useful as it allows monitoring in near-real-time the overall health of an information space. But it becomes critical during an information crisis (e.g.a pandemic or an election) when disorders can cause severe harm to people and institutions.
